README.md, before:

# Perkins-and-Rivenes-2022-EDA-Project

## Morphological Analysis of Birds in the Atlantic Forest of South America

Abstract--Ecogeographic rules explain variation within a species using biogeography. Allen's rule states that body surface-area-to-volume ratio for animals varies with the average temperature of their habitat. Typically, latitude is used as the temperature variable. However, this rule should hold true over any type of temperature variable. We want to know, is there a correlation between altitude and ratio of mass to length of birds in The Atlantic Forest? To answer this question, we will be using the Atlantic Bird Traits data set. This data set has been compiled over two centuries by tens of researchers (1820-2018) and includes data on 80% of the bird populations found in The Atlantic Forest. We will perform an exploratory analysis on this data set looking for correlations between altitude and ratio of mass to length of bird species. Based on other similar analyses, we expect to see a positive correlation between these variables.

Commit message:

deleted unnecessary files, edited README to include links, worked on Methods section of the poster

README.md, after:

# Rivenes-EDA-2022

## Morphological Analysis of Birds in the Atlantic Forest of South America

### Authors and Affiliations:

-   Bryn Rivenes, Casey Perkins
-   Affiliated with Minnesota State University Moorhead

### Introduction:

### Abstract:

Ecogeographic rules explain variation within a species using biogeography. Allen's rule states that body surface-area-to-volume ratio for animals varies with the average temperature of their habitat. Typically, latitude is used as the temperature variable. However, this rule should hold true over any type of temperature variable. We want to know, is there a correlation between altitude and ratio of mass to length of birds in The Atlantic Forest? To answer this question, we will be using the Atlantic Bird Traits data set. This data set has been compiled over two centuries by tens of researchers (1820-2018) and includes data on 80% of the bird populations found in The Atlantic Forest. We will perform an exploratory analysis on this data set looking for correlations between altitude and ratio of mass to length of bird species. Based on other similar analyses, we expect to see a positive correlation between these variables.

### Table of Contents:

-   [Main R Script](Project%20File.R)

-   [Poster Rmd File](My%20Poster.Rmd)

- [Poster md File](My-Poster.md)
